Proposal: FINAL_DATA (#2949)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-connect-tcp.md

A template-driven TCP transport proxy for HTTP is identified by a URI Template {{!RFC6570}} containing variables named "target_host" and "target_port".  This URI Template and its variable values MUST meet all the same requirements as for UDP proxying ({{!RFC9298, Section 2}}), and are subject to the same validation rules.  The client MUST substitute the destination host and port number into this template to produce the request URI.  The derived URI serves as the destination of a Capsule Protocol connection using the Upgrade Token "connect-tcp" (see registration in {{new-upgrade-token}}).

> When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of new Capsule Types named DATA and FINAL_DATA (see registrations in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of these capsule payloads represents the TCP payload data.  A FINAL_DATA capsule additionally indicates that sender has closed this stream, semantically equivalent to TCP FIN.  After sending a FINAL_DATA capsule, an endpoint MUST NOT send any more DATA or FINAL_DATA capsules on this data stream. (See {{closing-connections}} for related requirements.)

Reviewer: maybe missing `a` or `the`, see suggestion

```suggestion
When using "connect-tcp", TCP payload data is sent in the payload of new Capsule Types named DATA and FINAL_DATA (see registrations in {{data-capsule}}).  The ordered concatenation of these capsule payloads represents the TCP payload data.  A FINAL_DATA capsule additionally indicates that a sender has closed this stream, semantically equivalent to TCP FIN.  After sending a FINAL_DATA capsule, an endpoint MUST NOT send any more DATA or FINAL_DATA capsules on this data stream. (See {{closing-connections}} for related requirements.)
```

## Closing Connections

Connection termination is essentially symmetrical for proxies and their clients.  In this section, we use the term "endpoint" to describe an implementation of this specification in either role.

When closing connections, endpoints are subject to the following requirements:

* When an endpoint receives a valid TCP FIN, it MUST send a FINAL_DATA capsule.
* When an endpoint receives a valid FINAL_DATA capsule, it MUST send a TCP FIN.

> * Each endpoint MUST close its send stream when the corresponding TCP connection reaches the TIME-WAIT or CLOSED state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When the corresponding TCP connection reaches the TIME-WAIT or CLOSED state, each endpoint MUST close its send stream.
```
Purely editorial, but it might make sense to start with "When" for consistency with the bullet points above.

  - If the connection closed gracefully, the endpoint MUST close the send stream gracefully.
  - Otherwise, the endpoint SHOULD close the send stream abruptly, using a mechanism appropriate to the HTTP version:
    - HTTP/3: RESET_STREAM with H3_CONNECT_ERROR

>     - HTTP/2: RST_STREAM with CONNECT_ERROR

Reviewer: I think these are the first mentions of these frames, you may want to cite where they come from (i.e. link to the QUIC frame and HTTP/3 error code, the HTTP/2 frame and code, etc).

Author: I haven't been able to figure out how to make kramdown-rfc do this. :-/  If you know how, please do share.

    - HTTP/1.1 over TLS: a TLS Error Alert

>     - HTTP/1.1 (insecure): TCP RST.

Reviewer 2: Since we are giving advice on how to propagate TCP resets, do we want to RECOMMEND use of STOP_SENDING for H2/H3 too? I ask this because TCP resets are bidirectional.

Author: Nit: I believe STOP_SENDING is H3-only.

I think it's better not to send STOP_SENDING in this case.  Suppose we have [reliable reset](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-quic-reliable-stream-reset), and some kind of POST_PROXY_SUMMARY capsule.  Sending STOP_SENDING would prevent delivery of POST_PROXY_SUMMARY in the reply, even though it might be sensible and useful.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think my point is that _if_ we are to give advise regarding how proxies should handle TCP resets, we ought to state that it is a bidirectional reset and that stream has to be tear down in both directions.

The mechanism can be different within each HTTP versions (or depending on the extensions in play).

Reviewer 2: Ah, thank you very much for the explanation! I think I missed the part around the state machine. Looks good modulo editorial nits.

> * The endpoint SHOULD send a TCP RST when the receive stream is terminated if the TCP subsystem permits it and
>   - the receive stream ended abruptly, or
>   - a FINAL_DATA capsule was not received.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When the receive stream terminates abruptly or without a FINAL_DATA capsule received, an endpoint SHOULD send a TCP RST if the TCP subsystem permits it.
```
To me this sentence seems to be broken. It might make sense to change to something like this (with the added bonus of each condition being written in the same way).

In each HTTP version, any requirements related to closing connections in Classic HTTP CONNECT also apply to "connect-tcp", with the following modifications:

> * If an endpoint in this specification receives a TCP FIN indicating clean shutdown, it MUST send a FINAL_DATA capsule.

Reviewer 3: Why is the endpoint "in" this specification?  What happens when it isn't?

```suggestion
* If an endpoint receives a TCP FIN indicating clean shutdown, it MUST send a FINAL_DATA capsule.
```

Author: I added a sentence to define "endpoint" explicitly".

> * When a connection is terminated without a FINAL_DATA capsule, the endpoint SHOULD send a TCP RST if the underlying TCP implementation permits it.

Reviewer 3: Which endpoint?  I'm not following this one very well.

Author: The endpoint whose receive stream is terminated without ever carrying a FINAL_DATA.

I've reworded this requirement.

> * In HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, senders MAY additionally emit a stream error as in Classic HTTP CONNECT.

Reviewer 3: Under what circumstances?

Author: I've removed this reference and instead listed the requirements explicitly.  The new explicit requirements are much more detailed, allowing us to cover @wtarreau's use case without additional capsules (... if all the RECOMMENDED behaviors are followed).

A small additional risk is posed by the use of a URI Template parser on the client side.  The template input string could be crafted to exploit any vulnerabilities in the parser implementation.  Client implementers should apply their usual precautions for code that processes untrusted inputs.

## Resource Exhaustion attacks

> Proxy implementors should take special care to avoid resource exhaustion attacks when the client is not trusted. A malicious client can achieve highly asymmetric resource usage by colluding with a destination server and violating the ordinary rules of TCP or HTTP.  Some example attacks and mitigations:

Reviewer: Do you need the `is not trusted` caveat? Maybe even deleting the entire sentence leaves the paragraph clear enough that there are client-initiated resource exhaustion attacks a proxy needs to watch out for.

NB: I don't tend to trust anything at this layer of the stack, since it can be controlled by untrusted code running at a higher layer

Author: OK, I shortened this considerably.

* **Connection Pileup**: A malicious client can attempt to open a large number of proxy<->destination connections to exhaust the proxy's memory, port, or file descriptor limits. When using HTTP/2 or HTTP/3, each incremental TCP connection imposes a much higher cost on the proxy than on the attacker.
  - Mitigation: Limit the number of concurrent connections per client.
* **Window Bloat**: An attacker can grow the receive window size by simulating a "long, fat network" {{?RFC7323}}, then fill the window (from the sender) and stop acknowledging it (at the receiver).  This leaves the proxy buffering up to 1 GiB of TCP data until some timeout, while the attacker does not have to retain a large buffer.
  - Mitigation: Limit the maximum receive window for TCP and HTTP connections, and the size of userspace buffers used for proxying.  Alternatively, monitor the connections' send queues and limit the total buffered data per client.

> * **WAIT Abuse**: An attacker can force the proxy into a TIME-WAIT, CLOSE-WAIT, or FIN-WAIT state until the timer expires, tying up a proxy<->destination 4-tuple for up to four minutes after the client's connection is closed.

Reviewer: Where does four minutes come from?
